Developer Spotlight: Rajarshi Maitra, Bitshala (#878)
OpenSats/website: data/blog/developer-spotlight-rajarshi-maitra.mdx

---
title: "Rajarshi Maitra Found a Point of Light in the Dark Cave, Quit His Job, and Built Bitshala"
date: '2026-06-18'
tags: ['opensats', 'bitcoin', 'education', 'spotlight']
authors: ['ville']
images: ['/static/images/spotlight/rajarshi-maitra/featured.jpg', '/static/images/spotlight/rajarshi-maitra/hero.png']
draft: false

> summary: "Rajarshi Maitra walked away from a stable engineering career to build Bitshala, the program teaching India's developers to contribute to Bitcoin's open-source ecosystem."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: "Rajarshi Maitra walked away from a stable engineering career to build Bitshala, India's school for Bitcoin developers."
```

---

---

> At that moment I found Bitcoin and what Bitcoin did for me is like being that point of light in that dark cave.

---

> One humid morning in 2020, Rajarshi Maitra walked into his manager's office and told his

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One humid morning in 2021, Rajarshi Maitra walked into his manager's office and told his
```

> time.

It was one of Andreas Antonopoulos' videos that explained Bitcoin as a 'digital
anarchic system.'
Those three words echoed in Raj's mind, and he knew there was something there,
but he couldn't quite see it yet.

"I just needed these three words to figure out and connect the dots," he says.
"I'm not even looking for a job. I'm not even looking for a career. *I'm
looking for a hook to get into.*"

The dots, as he puts it, were politics, Austrian economics, and computer science. 

Politics came first: university years spent at a campus that was the epicenter
of West Bengal's 1970 communist revolution, a politics he believed blindly.
Then he left campus, watched that belief collide with how the world actually
worked, and went looking for an explanation.

Austrian economics gave him one: a body of theory built on why centrally planned
systems always fail.
Then mathematics and computers, two and a half years of self-teaching layered
on top of everything else.

His initial response had been skepticism: *this cannot be true... this is too
good to be true... maybe these guys are lying on the internet for views... or

> maybe like it's half-baked truth?* 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
maybe it's a half-baked truth?* 
```

What changed things was finally understanding why Bitcoin's mining process
can't be stopped: a network, once decentralized enough, becomes something no

> state or cartel can switch off.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nation-state or cartel can switch off.
```

"And if it cannot be killed and if it's decentralized enough, then you can do
anarchy politics on top of that," he says. "That was my aha moment."

He jumped in during a conflict that he didn't know was going on, the blocksize war.

With engineering drawings on his desk and Twitter open beside them, he'd been
following the conflict for months: learning the economics, the protocol and the
social dynamics all at once, barely keeping pace with the terminology.

By mid-2017 his boss was calling: *Why Raj, what's happening? You are not
paying attention to your designs?*

He watched the mining cartel hold out, month after month, then waver. SegWit,
the upgrade they had tried to block, activated that August. A hard core of them
forked away to start their own chain, Bitcoin Cash. Then came the cartel's last
move, a plan they called SegWit2x: hatched in a New York hotel, backed by most
of the world's mining power and a roomful of companies, set to double Bitcoin's

> block size that November. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
He watched the mining cartel hold out, month after month, then waver. SegWit, the upgrade they had tried to block, activated that August. A faction gave up trying to change Bitcoin and broke away to launch their own version of it, called Bitcoin Cash. Then came the cartel's last move: SegWit2x, a coordinated plan by companies controlling most of the world's mining power to double Bitcoin's block size that November. Thousands of node operators refused to run it, and the hard fork collapsed before it ever happened.
```

wherever a teacher chose to sit: under banyan trees, in temple courtyards, in
village clearings open to the air, without buildings or examinations or
certificates, just a teacher worth finding and students who had heard of them.

The last Pathshalas closed in the 1960s, displaced by universities with their
fixed curricula and their credentials. His father had attended one of the last
ones in West Bengal.

He wanted to do the same thing for Bitcoin. Bitcoin pathshala. [Bitshala][bitshala].

<Image
  src="/static/images/spotlight/rajarshi-maitra/bitshala-pathshala.jpg"
  darkSrc="/static/images/spotlight/rajarshi-maitra/bitshala-pathshala.jpg"
  alt="TODO"
  width={1920}
  height={970}
  className="w-full h-auto"
/>

> What Bitshala does is figure out how to reduce that three years \[of his
> bitcoin journey\] into six months.

By now Raj had years of experience in open-source development and Bitcoin, and
enough distance from his own cave to want the same way out for others.
"Nobody asked for my degree. Nobody asked if I had a coding background or not.
I was just a random person in GitHub who was solving their test issues and
they were happy with it.

> And that felt liberating as a job to do," Raj says.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that felt liberating as a job to do," Raj says with a smile.
```

But engineers and students from his community kept finding him, all arriving at
the same *impasse*: where to begin?

For three years, his answer to anyone who asked was a document he kept quietly
updating: bookmarks, books, projects, and communities woven into something
like a map.
He shared it freely, passing it along to anyone who needed a place to start.
Over time it grew daily dense enough that he began to see it differently.

> It wasn't a list anymore; it was a course.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
He passed it freely to whoever needed a place to start, and over time it thickened from a list into a course.
```

He launched Bitshala in January 2023. Three years on, close to 1,500 people have
completed at least one cohort across ten Indian cities, and ten of them now work

> full-time on Bitcoin, paid through grants from [OpenSats Developer Training][opensats-dev-training],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
full-time on Bitcoin, paid through grants from [OpenSats][opensats-dev-training],
```

that OpenSats backs around the world, from Brazil to Amsterdam to university
classrooms everywhere, each one shaped by where it grows.

In practice, five cohorts now run back to back, based on the following books:
*Mastering Bitcoin*, *Learning Bitcoin from the Command Line*, *Programming Bitcoin*, *Bitcoin Protocol Development*, *Mastering the Lightning Network*.
It takes under a year altogether, free, on [Discord][discord].

There's a certificate at the end, but nobody frames it; what graduates carry
with them is proof of work.

<Image
  src="/static/images/spotlight/rajarshi-maitra/cohort.png"
  darkSrc="/static/images/spotlight/rajarshi-maitra/cohort.png"
  alt="TODO"
  width={1920}
  height={970}
  className="w-full h-auto"
/>

Most people follow roughly the same path through the five books, theory first
and the harder material later, though nothing is enforced.
Cohorts meet live, every week, online, with no recordings to fall back on.

The proof of work that matters is a real GitHub issue on a real Bitcoin or
Lightning project, fixed well enough that a maintainer is willing to vouch
for it.
It's the same kind of issue Raj once solved himself, with no credentials and

> nobody asking for any.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proof of work that matters is a real GitHub issue on a real Bitcoin or
Lightning project, fixed well enough that a maintainer is willing to vouch
for it. It's the same kind of issue Raj once solved himself, with no credentials and
nobody asking for any.

Most people follow roughly the same path through the five books, theory first
and the harder material later, though nothing is enforced.
Cohorts meet live, every week, online, with no recordings to fall back on.
```

  darkSrc="/static/images/spotlight/rajarshi-maitra/web-application.png"
  alt="TODO"
  width={1920}
  height={970}
  className="w-full h-auto"
/>

One of the highlights of Bitshala culminated in March 2025, when thirty-three
developers gathered at a beach resort in Colva, South Goa.
Mornings ran on privacy protocols, second-layer scaling, and cryptographic
tooling; evenings went wherever the conversation wanted to go.

Nothing like it had happened among Indian Bitcoin developers before.
"Everybody is so unique, everybody is so passionate and interested," Raj says.
"The best thing I loved about it is the people I found along the way.
They say maybe the real Bitcoin is the friends you make along the way."

Raj married again.
His wife tells him he never stops working, and he doesn't disagree.
Making himself work isn't the problem; making himself stop is.

"I'm making an impact into the world that I want to see myself, want to leave
myself, I want my kids to inherit," he says.
"The world doesn't exist yet, but I'm like a brick layer of that world."

His official title is General Lead, and occasionally CEO, but he prefers the

> lead janitor without the capital letters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
His official title is General Lead, but he prefers the
lead janitor without the capital letters over CEO.
```

After all, "you clean up the mess, you're always cleaning up the mess, that's
the job."

> Figure out what you are good at, do it for Bitcoin and Bitcoin will figure
> it out for you. And it's an absolute 100% sure-shot guaranteed formula to work.
> I have not seen that fail. Look at me\! It's absolutely fu---ng magic.

Raj sat cross-legged in his chair, legs folded under him, his body angled
slightly away, in a dim hotel café in Oslo at the end of a long day at a human
rights conference.
I asked what he would tell a person still in the darkness, before Bitcoin,
before any point of light at all.

The first thing, he said, is to name it as a *crisis*.
Most people don't.
They negotiate with the pain, tell themselves the dissatisfaction is their
fault, and try to make it okay.

> But the signal is real. Recognize it, and you've already solved the hardest part.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But the feeling is real. Recognize it, and you've already solved the hardest part.
```

One day a point of light shall appear.
Most people see it and decide it's too far to be worth trying.
Walk toward it anyway, he said.

You overestimate the distance, way more than it actually is.
"Once you start walking towards it, the light also comes closer towards you,
and the last mile you can just run."

---

*Raj has been an OpenSats grantee since [January 2025][opensats-thousand-flowers#bitshala],
with his grant renewed in [March 2026][opensats-seventeenth-wave].
"When we first applied," Raj says, "the only other support fund we had was a
private donation, one-time, that had run out. And if OpenSats said no, I
wouldn’t have known where to go."*

*If you want to support Raj, join [Bitshala][bitshala] — as a student, a
contributor, or a teacher. Our support for Raj's work was made possible thanks
to your generous donations to [The General Fund][opensats-general-fund]. For
comments, corrections, or suggestions about our Spotlight series, please reach
out to [spotlight@opensats.org](mailto:spotlight@opensats.org).*

[bitshala]: /projects/bitshala
[opensats-thousand-flowers]: /blog/let-a-thousand-flowers-bloom#summer-of-bitcoin

> [opensats-dev-training]: blog/advancements-in-developer-training#growing-regional-developer-communities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[opensats-dev-training]: /blog/advancements-in-developer-training#growing-regional-developer-communities
```

> [opensats-thousand-flowers]: /blog/let-a-thousand-flowers-bloom#summer-of-bitcoin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[opensats-thousand-flowers]: /blog/let-a-thousand-flowers-bloom#bitshala
```
